pulp_installer docs needs a better explanation of variables (#604)
pulp/pulp_installer: docs/customizing.md

Customizing Your Pulp Installation
==================================

Background info on Ansible variables
------------------------------------

Because the pulp installer is based on Ansible it inherits 2 Ansible designs:

> 1. Variables can be set in many different ways by the user.

Author: Done slightly similarly.

2. Each role has its own set of variables.

This section (and the docs in general) will not cover every possible way of [setting variables](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html#where-to-set-variables), but instead cover the
simplest way: In the playbook itself.

> This section will not cover every single variable. They are all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section intends to demonstrate how to use Ansible variables to configure Pulp rather than listing every variable. Documentation for each Ansible variable can be found in each Ansible role's README file.
```

> documented within a role's README.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Note that variables are yaml and have types such as dictionaries (key-value pairs), lists, strings and booleans.

Author: I added the URL, but the rest of the docs are too hard to explain without using the term `dictionary`. Consider the following later blurb:
```
What that means **in terms of YAML syntax** is:
* There is a dictionary named `pulp_install_plugins` whose value is 3 nested dictionaries, `pulp-deb`, `pulp-file` and `pulp-container`.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-container` dictionary, whose value is an empty dictionary `{}`.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-deb`, whose value is is 1 key-value pair.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-file`, whose value is 2 key-value pairs.
```

> Note that variables are yaml and have types such as dictionaries (key-value pairs), lists, strings and booleans.

Author: Let's discuss this after the PR is merged.

It is too hard for me to rephrase this blurb.

```
What that means **in terms of YAML syntax** is:
* There is a dictionary named `pulp_install_plugins` whose value is 3 nested dictionaries, `pulp-deb`, `pulp-file` and `pulp-container`.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-container` dictionary, whose value is an empty dictionary `{}`.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-deb`, whose value is is 1 key-value pair.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-file`, whose value is 2 key-value pairs.
```

JSON can also be used as values to the variables.

> Some of the installer's variables, `pulp_settings` and `pulp_install_plugins` in particular, are dictionarieswith prescribed nested dictionaries nested under them. So do not be surprised when you see syntax like the following:

Author: See above comment about dictionaries.

```
  vars:
    pulp_install_plugins:
       pulp-container: {}
       pulp-deb:
         upgrade: true
      pulp-file:
        collectstatic: true
        version: "9.8.7"
```

What that means **in terms of YAML syntax** is:
* There is a dictionary named `pulp_install_plugins` whose value is 3 nested dictionaries, `pulp-deb`, `pulp-file` and `pulp-container`.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-container` dictionary, whose value is an empty dictionary `{}`.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-deb`, whose value is is 1 key-value pair.
* There is a nested dictionary named `pulp-file`, whose value is 2 key-value pairs.

See [the section below](#example-of-setting-a-multitude-of-variables) for more info on what this means in terms of actual Pulp Installer behavior.

Pulp Installer's types of Variables
-----------------------------------
Generally, there are 3 categories of variables
1. Those that make pulp_installer compatible with your environment. For example, the firewall.
2. Preferences for how Pulp is configured and deployed. In particular, which plugins to install.

> 3. Variables to control which version of plugins are installed, for reproducibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Variables to control which version of the individual plugins are installed.
```
I think control is the big thing here. Even for the first run, so imho it's more about predictability than reproducibility.
Feel free to disregard.

WRT to #2, the large data structure variables are `pulp_settings` & `pulp_install_plugins`.
WRT to #3, the large data structure variable is `pulp_install_plugins`.

Because the Pulp installer is composed of Ansible roles, you can use the variables for each of these roles to customize your Pulp installation.
For example, if you want to specify firewall requirements, edit the corresponding firewall variables associated with the [pulp_webserver](https://pulp-installer.readthedocs.io/en/latest/roles/pulp_webserver/#pulp_webserver) role.
Each role documents all the variables that it uses. Some variables are
used by multiple roles. In that case, they are documented in their primary role and mentioned in

> the `shared_variables` section the other roles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `shared_variables` section of the other roles.
```

      azure_account_name: 'Storage account name'
      azure_container: 'Container name (as created within the blob service of your storage account)'
      azure_account_key: 'Key1 or Key2 from the access keys of your storage account'
      azure_url_expiration_secs: 60
      azure_overwrite_files: 'True'
      azure_location: 'the folder within the container where your pulp objects will be stored'
      default_file_storage: 'storages.backends.azure_storage.AzureStorage'
```

`pulp_workers`, is set to `4`, which means that 4 worker processes will be started for processing jobs on a multi-core system. It replaces the default value of 2.

`pulp_install_plugins` does the following:
* Directs the installer to install all 3 plugins, pulp-deb, pulp-file and pulp-container.
* If pulp-container is not installed, the latest version will be installed.
* If pulp-container is already installed, the current version will be left intact.
* If pulp-deb is not installed, the latest version will be installed.
* If pulp-deb is already installed, it will be upgraded to the latest version.
* If pulp-file is not installed, version `9.8.7` will be installed.

> * If pulp-file is already installed, it will be upgraded to `9.8.7`.

Reviewer 2: We don't prevent a downgrade here, do we?
We also don't perform it (as in roll back the neccessary migrations).
Just a thought, maybe an actual issue.

Author: Yeah, that's something we haven't addressed yet from either an application perspective or an installer perspective.

I didn't want to mention it at all until we agree on a technical approach, or a message about the limitation.

More information about `pulp_settings`
* Please do not modify `/etc/pulp/settings.py` manually after install, because re-running the installer for upgrades / repairing Pulp will revert your changes. Please re-run the installer instead with your changes added to `pulp_settings`.
* `pulp_settings` is used during both the installation process (it can cause errors at install time with incorrect values), and once pulp is installed.

Explanation of plugin version compatibility with Pulpcore
--------------------------------------------------

Pulp 3 has a plugin architecture so that new content types and features can be added by the
larger community. However, both pulpcore & plugins are installed by the installer using `pip`, which has limited
dependency resolution. Plugins release at their own lifecycles. Thus in the worst case scenario, the
2 stable branches of plugin pulp_juicy could depend on the current branch of pulpcore, while the 2

> stable branches of pulp_sugary could depend on an older branch of pulpcore.

Reviewer 2: To me it's not obvious, what "2 stable branches" you are referring to here.
Shouldn't it be the stable version of the plugin that is compatible with (at least) two minor versions of pulpcore?

Author: Rephrased.

In order to avoid breaking multiple plugins for the sake of one plugin, and to avoid breaking existing
installations, upgrading a plugin will not cause pulpcore to be updated as a dependency. Similarly,
if there is an attempt to update a plugin to a version that is incompatible with pulpcore, the installer
will fail and exit. The installer does a compatibility check early in the installation to prevent Pulp
from being installed or upgraded to an incompatible state.

> Thus you, yourself, must research plugin compatibility with the pulpcore version whether you are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus you, yourself, must research plugin compatibility with the pulpcore version whenever you are
```

installing one or more plugins. With each plugin release, the plugin compatibility is announced as

> part of the release announcement and included in the documentation for the specific plugin. 

Reviewer 2: The same holds true for upgrading any plugin or core. Right?

Recommended Workflows for Pulpcore & Plugin Versioning
------------------------------------------------------

### Latest Version with Minimal Effort:

Initial installation:

1. Make sure you are running the latest version of the installer, which installs the latest version
   of pulpcore (3.12.2).
1. Confirm that all the latest stable releases of your desired plugins are compatible with pulpcore
   3.12.2, such as by reading the release announcement email thread for pulpcore 3.12.1, reading the
plugins README, or as a last resort, reading their `setup.py`.
1. Set `pulp_install_plugins` with each plugin listed as a key, with an empty enum '{}' as each plugin's value.
1. Run `pulp_installer`.
1. Make sure to save your variables/playbook for later usage.

Example `pulp_install_plugins`:
```
  vars:
    pulp_install_plugins:
      pulp-container: {}
      pulp-file: {}
      pulp-rpm: {}
```

Upgrading your installation:

1. Observe what is the latest version of `pulp_installer`, and what version of pulpcore it installed
   (3.12.2).
1. Confirm that all the latest stable releases of **currently installed** plugins are compatible

>    with pulpcore 3.12.2, such as by reading the release announcement email thread for pulpcore 3.12.1,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   with pulpcore 3.12.2, such as by reading the release announcement email thread for pulpcore 3.12.2,
```

reading the plugins README, or as a last resort, reading their setup.py.
1. If they are not all compatible yet, **wait** for the plugins to be updated for
   compatibility.
1. Upgrade `pulp_installer` to the latest version.
1. Set `pulp_install_plugins` with each plugin listed as a key, and with each plugin having a key under it called `upgrade` set to the value `true`.
1. Re-run `pulp_installer`.
1. Make sure to save your variables/playbook for later usage.

Example `pulp_install_plugins`:
```
  vars:
    pulp_install_plugins:
      pulp-container:
         upgrade: true
      pulp-file:
         upgrade: true
      pulp-rpm:
         upgrade: true
```

### Specifying Exact Versions with Reproducibility:

Initial installation:

1. Observe the latest branch of `pulp_installer`, and what version of pulpcore it installs (3.12.2).
1. Confirm that all the latest stable releases of your desired plugins are compatible with pulpcore

>    3.12.2, such as by reading the release announcement email thread for pulpcore 3.12.1, reading the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   3.12.2, such as by reading the release announcement email thread for pulpcore 3.12.2, reading the
```

plugins README, or as a last resort, reading their setup.py.
1. If they are not all compatible yet, try the last version of the installer that installs pulpcore
   3.11.z . Then confirm that there exist stable releases of your desired plugins that are compatible
with pulpcore 3.11.z. If there are none, try pulpcore 3.10.z, and repeat.
1. Once a compatible pulpcore version is found, Set `pulp_install_plugins` with each plugin listed as a key, and with each plugin having a key under it called `version` set to the version as the value (with quotes).
1. Run `pulp_installer`
1. Make sure to save your variables/playbook for later usage.

Example `pulp_install_plugins` (with bogus version values):
```
  vars:
    pulp_install_plugins:
      pulp-container:
         version: "4.5.6"
      pulp-file:
         version: "5.6.7"
      pulp-rpm:
         version: "6.7.8"

> ```

Reviewer 2: I think, this should include the `pulp_version` variable.

Author: We do not want users ever setting that though. The pulp_version is assumed to be specific to the installer version by default.

Upgrading your install:

1. Observe what the latest version of `pulp_installer` is, and what version of pulpcore it installed
   (3.12.2). (Even if there is no update, you can still upgrade your plugins.)
1. Confirm that all the latest stable releases of **currently installed** plugins are compatible

>    with pulpcore 3.12.2, such as by reading the release announcement email thread for pulpcore 3.12.1,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   with pulpcore 3.12.2, such as by reading the release announcement email thread for pulpcore 3.12.2,
```

reading the plugins README, or as a last resort, reading their setup.py.
1. If they are not all compatible yet, try the last version of the installer that installs pulpcore
   3.11.z . Then confirm that there exist stable releases of your desired plugins that are compatible

> with pulpcore 3.11.z. If there are none, try pulpcore 3.10.z, and repeat.

Reviewer 2: This should never transcend the pulpcore version you have already installed.
"... until you reach the current pulpcore version of your installation, at which point we are sad to inform you, that there will be no upgrade for you today." <- just kidding. Please find a more suitable wording.

1. Once a compatible pulpcore version is found, Set `pulp_install_plugins` with each plugin listed as a key, and with each plugin having a key under it called `version` set to the **new** version as the value (with quotes).
1. Upgrade `pulp_installer` to the latest version (if there is a new version.)
1. Run `pulp_installer`
1. Make sure to save your variables/playbook for later usage.

Example `pulp_install_plugins` (with bogus version values):
```
  vars:
    pulp_install_plugins:
      pulp-container:
         version: "5.6.7"
      pulp-file:
         version: "6.7.8"
      pulp-rpm:
         version: "7.8.9"

> ```

Reviewer 2: random thought: would it be wise to upgrade one plugin at a time?

Author: Honestly, that would be a safe way to go when pulpcore's minor release is unchanged.

But it would not be compatible with say upgrading from pulpcore 3.1 to 3.13, you'd need to upgrade all your plugins.
